# Extra credit assignment: Expected values

You will write a program that simulates a die roll. 
In the program, you will compute the expected value using the theorem from chapter 6.4,
and you will also calculate the average by using a random number generator to "roll the die"
for a certain amount of trials (entered by the user).

You can write this programming assignment in any language.

### Starter code (C++)

#include <iostream>		// needed for cin/cout
#include <cstdlib>		// needed for rand
#include <ctime>		// needed for time
using namespace std;

int main()
{
	// initialize random number generator
	srand(time(NULL));


	// pause before quit
	cin.ignore();
	cin.get();
	return 0;
}

### Declaring arrays

Create two arrays (or, in Python, lists). One will be storing the possible values we can get 
from rolling the die (1 through 6), and the other stores the probability for each die roll (1/6 for each outcome).

The array of values can be an integer, float, or double, but it will store the values of the die: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

For example:

```c++
int values[6] = { 1,2,3,4,5,6 };
```

The array of probabilities will store 1/6 for each die roll. Note that you'll have to write these fractions
as decimal division in C++, otherwise C++ will truncate any data after the decimal point.

```c++
float prob[6] = { 1.0 / 6.0, 1.0 / 6.0, 1.0 / 6.0, 1.0 / 6.0, 1.0 / 6.0, 1.0 / 6.0 };
```

### Displaying the values and probabilities

At the beginning of the program, it should display all possible values and their probabilities.
You can do this with a simple for-loop:

```c++
cout << "Values and probability:" << endl;
for (int i = 0; i < 6; i++)
{
	cout << values[i] << "\t" << prob[i] << endl;
}
```

When it is running, it will look like this:

```
Values and probability:
1       0.166667
2       0.166667
3       0.166667
4       0.166667
5       0.166667
6       0.166667
```

### Calculate the expected result

We can use the formula from 6.4 to calculate the expected result.
First, create a **float** variable named `expected` and initialize it to `0`.

Then, create a for-loop that will iterate over `0 <= i < 6`...

```c++
for (int i = 0; i < 6; i++)
{
}
```

Within the for loop, yuo will calculate the value<sub>i</sub> * prob<sub>i</sub> and add it onto the expected variable.

After displaying it like this:

```c++
cout << "Expected: " << expected << endl;
```

The result should be 3.5.

### Run the trials

Now we will actually "roll the die" and calculate the actual average.

First, ask the user how many times to run the trial. Create an **integer** variable called `times`,
and store the user's input here.

```c++
cout << endl << "How many times to run trial?" << endl;
cin >> times;
```

Then, create a **float** variable named `sum`, and initialize it to `0`.

Create a for-loop that will iterate over `0 <= i < 6`...

```c++
for (int i = 0; i < 6; i++)
{
}
```

In the for loop, get a random value... You will use the `rand()` function (in c++) to select an index of the value.

**Note: The random index is different from the value itself... the index will be 0 to 5, the value will be 1 to 6.**

You can pull a random value (a random side of the die) with:

```c++
int val = values[rand() % 6];
```

Then, whatever that value is, add it onto your `sum` variable.

After the loop has finished, create a new **float** variable named `average`. Assign `average` the value of `sum / times`.

Finally, display the value of the `average` with a cout statement:

```c++
cout << "Average:  " << average << endl;
```

### Example output

Every time you run the program, you will get different results for the *average*, because each time we get different die rolls.

Here's an example output with a small amount of trials:

```
Values and probability:
1       0.166667
2       0.166667
3       0.166667
4       0.166667
5       0.166667
6       0.166667

Expected: 3.5

How many times to run trial?
10

Average:  2.9
```

However, if you have more trials, the average will be closer to the expected value:

```
Values and probability:
1       0.166667
2       0.166667
3       0.166667
4       0.166667
5       0.166667
6       0.166667

Expected: 3.5

How many times to run trial?
10000

Average:  3.5
```
